# A4: Food for Thought Project Documentation

## Background 

Our team chose to focus on the environmental impact of food based on our common interests in social impact and topics that affect people around the world. Thus, every decision in our design process was guided by a desire to leave an impact and strong impression on the average user audience of our tool without being overwhelming or overly complex. 

In our research, we came across a paper that seemed to be cited repeatedly in many of the articles we read: [Reducing food’s environmental impacts through producers and consumers](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/360/6392/987) (Poore and Nemecek, 2018). This paper includes a broad overview of the global impacts of food production, comparing various types of production systems for more than 40 agricultural commodities from around the world. The dataset from the paper measures impact through five environmental indicators: greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, land use, freshwater withdrawal, eutrophication potential, and acidification potential. While we often only consider emissions in our analysis of environmental impact, this dataset is unique in that it includes a more comprehensive account of factors that can cause environmental trade-offs and can't be captured through only emissions data. 

## Design Decisions

We first decided to create a set of interactive visualizations with the animation technique of "scrollytelling," as we analyzed in some of the lecture examples. We felt this medium would best incorporate a strong narrative into our visualization, allowing each graph to tell a story that builds on the previous one. Especially for users without much background on the topic, we thought this format would be more digestible and conducive to a linear story. 

For the first graph, we wanted to use a format that gave a broad overview of how food production has a significant environmental impact. In our research, one of the facts that stood out to us was that **food contributes to nearly a third of global GHG emissions.** To illustrate this to our users, we thought it would be best to use a treemap format. The treemap first shows both food and non-food as the main categories, but we wanted to keep the subcategories underneath food and non-food still visible (grayed out) as to draw the reader in to the many complex processes that go into the main categories, which we usually don't notice or think about. We wanted the color scheme we used to be consistent across visualizations and have muted, colorful earth tones to be memorable and also subtly relate back to the theme of our site. We intentionally made the top bar the bar to click back to a previous category because we wanted the user to notice where they were in the hierarchy of categories as their eyes traveled back to the top bar. In addition, we made sure that the animation used for zooming in and out quickly expanded a different category wider than the size of the graph to give the user a feeling for the scale of where they are in the categories and make them aware of the context of their zooming. 

For our second graph, we wanted to highlight the freshwater withdrawal from the production of different foods because water isn't something we often think about when considering environmental impact. We also wanted to follow a story-telling path that went from more broad--the first graph giving a general overview and breakdown of GHG emissions--to more specific--the next graphs go into depth on specific food commodities. One consistency we wanted to keep across our animations was the feeling of context: a smooth animation of zooming in and out to hone in on details while keeping the user aware of the big picture. This graph incorporates zooming through a selection of food through the dropdown menu. This filtering feature then highlights the food of interest, using a similar color scheme of blue and orange as the previous visualization, and zooms in to its nearest ranked neighbors in terms of the food's water use. This design choice was both logistically rational (displaying all 40 food commodities on the same graph would be overwhelming to the user), maintained consistency from the previous visualization, and paired well with the overall smooth scrolling animations of our webpage. We standardized all the data to ensure that all foods were in units per 1000 kilocalories (kcal), allowing the user to fairly compare water use between foods in a way that is more understandable to them. 1000 kilocalories is about how much the average person would eat in two meals. Thus, if prawns use 3413 liters of water per 1000 kcal, that's using about 11 bathtubs of water for two meals worth of prawn. We included this context in the visualization text to give the user an understanding of what the numbers meant. We also highlighted the amount of L/kcal for the selected food with a large visual label on the graph to make the number immediately stand out to the user. 

**A rationale for your design decisions.** How did you choose your particular visual encodings, interaction, and animation techniques? What alternatives did you consider and how did you arrive at your ultimate choices?

- **An overview of your development process.** Describe how the work was split among the team members. Include a commentary on the development process, including answers to the following questions: Roughly how much time did you spend developing your application (in people-hours)? What aspects took the most time? (https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ion0fPCR9kv_oxrwtSAnY4OMmPUoXg2SYjhlvtjqQC0/edit?usp=sharing)